That was
a
great time.
Right, welcome Minister Patterson.
Great to see you again. Thank you very much for coming to the fantastic Primary
Production Select Committee. We have you for 45 minutes so if you want to do
some introductory remarks I know we do have a few questions from the
team.
Thank you Madam Chair.
Yeah, I will keep my introductions quite brief.
I'm aware that you've had a marathon week and I'd like it to be more
back in
forward note. I know that you're familiar with Ray and Jane and the rest of
the team that will have probably been sitting up here for hours on end.
So
from a rural communities perspective it has been a stellar year in
terms of across the board commodity prices set
record or near record levels in
most cases interest rates falling significantly
and tourism numbers heading back towards
pre-COVID
levels. Also note that that's reflected in
record levels of confidence
within our farming sector which of course underpins much
of our rural communities. From what I can see
initial caution is now leading to investment
and as a general rule of thumb I think further south you go
the better it gets in many respects of course but in this case
economically.
That said there is a lot of challenges still for our rural
communities at the forefront and what I've
highlighted in the past
are the severe pressure that our rural health sector is
under Minister
Ducey is to be commended in convening a
series of thirteen rural health roadshows around the country for which
myself and the rural communities team supported.
We now are in possession of a report
that will be released publicly on the fifteenth of
December I believe which
is a really good insight into you know the current state
of play but in broad terms
the consistent themes are
access to workforce challenges around that travel
allowances and a clear... um,
desire to, to deliver more services closer to
home. Uh, and I think that that
is,
it's a, a response to the fact that we had a massive centralization
of the Health New Zealand. Uh, you know,
it was very fragmented and then rolled into one, and then that has led
to a disconnect to the frontline and rural health servicing.
Uh, and we're now seeing that unwinding and more regionalization of it in
that. So, so we're heading in the right direction, but, uh, it's clear that that
had led to a disconnect from the frontline, uh, services.
Uh, issues around connectivity continue to be a challenge.
Uh, we've got the, uh, you know, the shape of the
roll-up of copper wire service, uh, that we are
working through at the moment. There's the 3G getting turned-
Mm-hmm.
... uh, off coming up. So that's, uh, we're keeping a very close
eye, uh, on that. And certainly, uh, and as
highlighted recently, the resilience of our communications networks
during, uh, emergency management, um,
events. Uh, one of the key focuses that we've highlighted before to
this committee, and I just commend Jane and her team for the work, is, uh, uh, you
know, 'cause it's sort of unheralded stuff-
Mm-hmm.
... but the, the work they're doing around, uh, statistics, because
it, you know, my first question in getting this role was, uh, how do we define a
rural community?
Mm-hmm.
And, and i- it seems like every department,
uh, you know, categorizes it differently.
So there's work going on and Jane and her team are leading that to standardize
that.
Mm-hmm.
And just as an example, uh, I think the
current statistics point to about 16% of New
Zealand being, uh, classified as regional, where we believe it
could be as, uh, rural, we believe that could be as high as 25%,
which makes a material difference within this ecosystem and
how resources are distributed. So I see that as, uh, under
the radar, but really important work that this, um, rural communities team are
doing. Uh, in terms of, uh,
forestry's, uh, obviously been another one that's, uh, uh, been something
that's, uh, you know, we're all aware has been a real, um, flashpoint
in rural communities. And, you know, I'm pleased that we have,
um, landed the restrictions on class one to six
land, and, and driving very much for that right tree, right
place. Uh, in terms of the positives, I think the, the upcoming reforms to
the Resource Management
Act will be hugely welcomed in our rural
communities. Uh, it has just got far too hard to get things
done. Uh, and I, I would also like to
highlight investment in irrigation and water
storage, uh, that NPI
leads, uh, some of that work, but it also crosses over into my
regional development, uh, portfolio with Kanoa.
Uh, so, uh, investment in, um, significant
investment in Canterbury, Northland, uh, smaller investments in Wairarapa
and Tairāwhiti, uh, but there is much more to do.
Uh, Hurunui, uh, bigger schemes in Tairāwhiti,
significant schemes in Hawke's Bay, uh, Wairarapa and Central
Otago. Uh, and just to finish, uh, the
wool thing, which is really good to see, the wool price
lifting, which has given farmers,
uh, a little bit of hope. We're not at levels now where people are, um,
jumping for joy, but at least we're reached the, the very low bar
of covering sharing costs and a little bit of a, uh, addition to the
bottom line rather than a, uh, a cost.
Uh, a lot of the innovation that's been funded through NPI over the years,
things like acoustic panel, uh, acoustic paneling, uh,
the pigments, particles and powder stuff, which I consider to be the holy grail-
Mm-hmm.
... because it's the, it's the game changer.
And we'll, there'll be some announcements around that next week, actually.
On Monday, I'm going down to, um,
highlight the first commercial, um,
shipment, uh, going, which hopefully will then lead on to wider
investment into that, uh, that very
promising, um, category for, for wool, winter bio-agents.
Uh, and that I will point out has the ability to take genuine
scale. Uh, it's not just a wee niche, uh,
opportunity. Uh, and we're seeing investments, uh, starting to flow into onshore
manufacturing, uh, and hopefully some more to be announced
soon. Uh, and just finally, uh, the Wool Alliance-
Mm-hmm.
... which is a, uh, an
amalgamation or, or an enduring model, what does an enduring model for
the wool industry look like? Uh, uh, that hasn't had
an industry body for one of the only two primary sector
industries that doesn't have a, um, an
industry, um, group representing it, uh,
since the Wool Board and the levy got voted down.
Uh, so we're looking at bringing the Wool Alliance together, which is, uh, wool
impact, the Campaign for Wool, uh, ROMS, which is the
research and development arm, uh, and a- aligned with, uh,
Beef and Lamb New Zealand. So that, that work is now being socialized with farmers
in terms of what, what that's going to look like.
So with that, I'll just open up to the committee for, um,
questioning.
Thank you. Thank you very much. Thank you, Minister. Right. Jo?
Thank you. Thank you for your time this morning, Minister, and again, thanks to the
team who are accompanying you. In the past when I've asked you
questions about your role as Minister, you've, um, uh,
mentioned that it's largely one of advocacy.
So I kind of want to target my questions to you around that today.
And I wanna start off, I've got a few primaries, but I'll start off, and a few
supplementaries if you'll indulge me, Madam Uh, Chair, around school buses,
rural school buses. And, um, recently, um,
it's a big issue for our rural communities, right?
And recently, families in Maraekākaho,...
say they're being left with unaffordable transport costs after learning the
Ministry of Education will discontinue the school bus route to three Hastings
secondary schools next year. So my questions around
that to you, Minister, are, have you raised any concerns with the Minister of
Education about the impact that these cancellations will have on rural
families?
Uh, yes. We met with the minister, actually with rural
women, uh, who have been-
Mm-hmm. ... quite vocal on, on this. So it's something that we, we are advocating for.
But as you're aware, I mean, that formula for rural buses
hasn't changed since 1991 I think.
Mm-hmm.
So actually the same as, uh-
Yes.
... under the government you were in.
Uh, so it, it continues to be a bit of a, a work in progress,
but, um,
yeah, so I have no real updates in terms of changes, but yeah-
coughing
] ... we're certainly making the minister aware that, you know, some of these
communities are impacted.
Supplementary, um, uh, Madam Chair.
Um, do you think it's acceptable that parents in ?????
will be facing unacceptable costs simply to get their children to
school?
sighs ] Uh, look, there's always gonna be
impacted comm- we gotta look at this at a systematic level.
Uh, so yeah, I do, absolutely I do. But, uh, how we
have a system that's
flexible enough to, to accommodate those
examples, uh, and I think, you know, my own view on this and certainly what we're
advocating for is it's too, um, inflexible at the moment,
uh, and there needs to be some,
uh, ability to innovate within that, that model.
Uh, Jane, you might like to pick up on some of this-
Can I say something, uh-
Yeah, sure. Um, I mean, uh, you're right, Minister.
The way that they do the formula is, um, a- it hasn't been
updated for a number of years. Um, and some of the difficulties
a- as there was an annual, there's an annual point in the year where they set the
school bus routes for-
Mm-hmm.
... the following year. So, every year, there's population changes because,
um, children either move from primary to secondary school or from secondary school
out into the big wide world. And that means that sometimes school bus
routes, um, fall in and out of eligibility-
Mm-hmm.
... um, for running because they, they, they don't have the ch- students up the, up
the driveway anymore. Um, and so annually there is always, um,
unfortunately some movements and some shifts.
There are some bus routes that get added.
There are some bus routes that get subtracted.
So, it is disappointing to see, but it is unfortunately one of those things that
the ministry keeps an eye on every year and then re-tenders those
services. They tender the other services for longer periods of time, but there is
always a bit of movement a- around the margins.
Thank you. Supplementary. As Minister for Rural Communities, do you think that this
treats rural communities fairly with the decisions like this around our school
buses and our children not being able to access the school of their
choice because of the changes that, these, this, changes to the bus routes?
Well, it's a consistent formula that's been there for long periods of time.
So as I say, I, I do think-
hmm.
... there's room for more flexibility.
Um, we're not directly in control of, uh, dictating that, but that's certainly
what we're advocating for.
Mm-hmm.
And, um,
final supplementary, roll, two rolled into one, Madam
Chair. Will you advocate for the reinstatement of the ?????
school bus route for families in that community?
And also, um,
what have you done as far as advocating ...
well, more than advocating for rural communities that are facing, uh,
unaffordable costs to get their children to school in your role as
Minister for Rural Communities?
Well, I'm not
... uh, I, I don't believe I've been ...
I stand to be corrected, but I don't believe I'm, I've been directly lobbied
by the school that you, uh, reference.
So-
Okay.
... uh, absolutely if they want to get in touch with me, but,
uh, it's a systematic thing and I, I do think it, uh, deserves more
flexibility and the ability of other services to
be tacked onto it so that it does make it economical.
I would point out that the Ministry of Education spends
263 million dollars a year on school buses.
So it is a-
Mm-hmm.
... a, a big expense. And that's-
Yep. ... that's, that's an absolute necessity.
There's no, you know, this is not a cost saving thing, but it's gotta be
economic. There's not a bottomless pit of money.
Thank you.
Yeah. I'd argue that, that, um, the ministry spends a lot on, on funding
kids to get to their closest school and that, that I think the review first came up
in 2023, but you guys kind of pushed it to the side.
So it's just one of those things that goes through.
Madam Chair.
Anyway. Right, yes, Mark. Question?
Thank you, Madam Chair. And, and good ... Minister, good to see you, uh, as always.
Sorry for my absence. Um, sir, do you want to speak to the
issues concerning rural contractors?
Um, I don't know if you've had-
Mm-hmm.
... any discussion, um, w- with officials and around rural
contractors, the issues in and around some of the equipment-
coughing
] ... issues that they're having with New Zealand Police officiating the law
as is the law is written. Um, and, and
are you working with, um, various ministers
outside of your wheelhouse to try and alleviate some of the concerns that rural
contractors have had in and around, um, rural New Zealand moving their
gear up and down rural New Zealand doing their job?
Yes. Well, I, I certainly am aware there's an issue particularly, uh,
around the Waikato region. It's, uh, I've certainly, um,
we've had meetings and correspondence, uh, with
those, um, contractors.
Uh, yeah, so the, I mean, that's
in terms of I'd have to go but this is going back a little bit-
Mm-hmm.
... uh-
That's
right. ... Mark. Um-
Licensing.
Yeah, the, the weights and the, the licensing.
So yes, I mean, th- it's something that has been going on for a long period of
time. Because all of a sudden the police have decided to, uh, uh,
enforce these laws. But, uh, in terms of specific,
uh,
advocacy, uh, beyond sort of, uh, anecdotal
discussions with, uh, ministers and other MPs-
coughing
] ... no, I couldn't actually point to, uh, a genuine action on that, I'm being
totally honest with you, Mark.
Very good. Thank you, Minister.
We, we have done this prior.
Scott, did you have a question?
Oh, h- hang on a second, Michael. I think, uh... I'll bring Jane in.
Sorry. Um, we, we did raise, um, these concerns prior, but
I don't think it was within the current 20- uh, the current period of the
review.
Yeah.
So I think it was possibly a previous, um-
Yeah. I, I appreciate that it's ongoing, but I think to that point, the fact that
it is ongoing, um, would fall inside this, this annual
review period. I mean, this problem has not gone away and I just wondered if we are
managing to, to, uh, uh, h- a- you
know, get a handle on that problem?
Or is it continuing?
Look, I haven't... The discussions I had were probably going
back 12 months ago, so that, that was kind of my...
or I'm a bit vague on the, the details. But I haven't...
The, the... We haven't been approached lately on that issue, so I guess my
assumption is that there is some discretion being, uh,
utilized by the police now.
Right.
Okay. Um, but if that's something that you're hearing is still ongoing,
then, um, more than happy to take it up.
Thank you, Minister.
Okay. Thank you. Right, we'll move on to Scott. Thank you, Scott.
Uh, good to see you, Minister. And, um, I'm very keen
to explore health a little bit more, because there's been a
$7 billion investment into health under this government.
And what, what support, other than a report that's coming out, what
support, actual support, has been provided for rural
communities in particular?
Well, I'm going to, uh, circulate this report, uh, to the
committee, uh, through the clerk when it becomes publicly available, because I
would like this committee to actually, uh, dig into this,
uh, issue a little bit more. But there is...
What we're starting to see is there is some, uh,
some movement. We're starting to get some resourcing to the front line, which is
what we're, um,
?????? It's been $164 million, for example, put into,
uh, the after-hours and emergency care
in rural communities. Uh, there's, um, a
number of, uh, initiatives that I could go through that...
Um, we have, uh, rural
hubs, uh, now being... Uh, uh, I've just got to get the
terminology right. Uh,
so, uh, the after-hours urgent care.
So there's six rural prototype locations that have been,
uh, are up and running. Um, now, we're looking to roll them out to
70, so, um, acknowledging that they're...
you know, that's, that's a system that's under real pressure.
But, uh, that is an example, a good example, of work actually
progressing. Uh, rural training hubs, so we've had
a, uh, s-
four rural training hubs, the first one in Harawa,
has been, um, has been established, and we're looking at one in
each of the four regions. Uh, so...
And you will also be well aware of the Waikato Medical, uh,
School in the rural-
Very aware.
Yeah, so that-
Great news.
Yeah, so, so that... A- and I'd like to go into that a little bit, because I
was-
I was a doubting Thomas on this. Um, obviously been lobbied hard, like
you had, by the University of Otago.
Well, you know-
Um-
I mean, I... We're an economically rational party.
Yeah, well...
(laughing)
It's, it's not April Fools' Day, Scott.
The, uh...
So I was a doubting Thomas until I actually met with them-
Well, you're in your congressional
party. ... uh, actually at Te Kuiti and, uh, once they...
I, I, I was fully aware of why the current system isn't
working. So we've got the rural immersion, um,
courses within, uh, Otago and Auckland,
uh, but what we're seeing is, say, an intake of 200, there might be a dozen
students that decide to, to go into the rural immersion course,
which we're seeing maybe three or four
actually go on to rural practice. So we've got this, this massive funnel
that ends up with virtually no students actually going into
rural.
Mm.
Uh, and the, the Waikato Medical School will be
specifically targeting... Uh, it, it'll be full rural
immersion, so the, the students that go in there will
come out and go into rural. So that's, uh, I
think, a st- a massive step in the right direction.
It is gonna take a while to, to work its way through, but now that I fully
understand the concept and why the current system isn't
delivering, uh, I think this has the potential to be a bit of a
game-changer for rural workforces.
Thank you. Supplementary.
Yes.
So are you saying that
students who go through the Waikato Medical School will be bonded to
rural communities? Is that, is that what is the intention?
Well, well, there's already bonding available, uh,
on a voluntary basis, so you can apply.
Um, there is a formula there, so students that do go into rural
and, uh, you know, stay three, four or five years,
there's, there is a write-off in the student
loans. Uh, but what we're finding is that that's not
being taken up, um, at, at a very high level.
Uh, students want to retain some flexibility, so...
So whether more bonding is the answer, uh, I don't know, but
evidence to date is pretty thin on that.
So that's a no? You're not bonding...
You're not requiring students to, to be-
Well, it's... Uh, uh, uh, bearing in mind it's not me that, uh, is making these
decisions-
Okay.
... but, uh, I don't think that's the intention.
Okay. Thank you, Minister.
Okay. Okay. Thank you, Minister. I think we'll move on.
Can I-
I've got a few supplementaries.
Can I, can I also just, uh, highlight?
Because it is important and we did have direct input
into the rural, uh, health package that...
uh, wellbeing package that was in the budget, uh, $12 million
over four years. Uh, we've seen recently an announcement,
uh, $2.7 million into FarmStrong.
Uh, I understand the Rural Support Trust is close to, uh, signing a, a
delivery agreement as well, uh, with the Ministry of Health.
So that's, uh, new money coming in to, uh, rural health and
wellbeing.
Thank you. Right, we have a sup—through the chair, please.
We have a sup from Hamish Campbell.
Excellent. Tha- thank you, Minister.
What, what impact do you think, uh, telehealth will have to take the pressure off
rural GPs, uh, to broaden access to rural
communities?
Uh, a very good question.
Thank
you. It's being utilized more and more, uh, and utilized quite
well. Uh, so yes, I think it does have a very
important place. Uh, the other thing I'm hearing of, if I'm being honest, is that
we've gotta be careful we don't make this a default position, so it's getting
balanced there, where it's supplementing, uh, and
taking the pressure off the existing, uh, workforce, but
it's not getting to the point where we can use it as a catch-all where,
"Okay, they've got access to telehealth." Uh, the other part of that
is rural connectivity. We've got to make sure that the co- connectivity
is adequate to, to be able to provide a service, and-
Mm-hmm.
... that is something that, uh, Minister Ducey and I are actually
meeting, uh, shortly with Minister Goldsmith to, to just work
through, uh, so- where some of the gaps are and where we can fill
them.
The... Yeah, and I understand with the medical school that it's a graduate medical
school, so the, the students do a year on site in Hamilton, and then
they get, they'll get put, placed in-
Mm-hmm.
... certain rural hospitals and medical centers around the country.
So that's how it's gonna work, as I understand it, the model.
And, and I think the other important thing to that, Madam Chair, is that these are
people that are going in specifically to train for rural.
And they're targeting people that are from rural communities, uh,
in the first place, that actually have a, um, desire to, to serve in these
communities.
100%. Thank you.
Right, one very quick sup, Scott, and then we're gonna move on. Thank you.
So something like a quarter of people aged over 65-
Mm-hmm.
... live in rural communities. That's 20% of the population.
Um, what of the targeted budgeting is going to that
cohort, and what's, what's, what's the plans to make sure there's
better health outcomes for our elderly living in, in rural
communities?
Uh, well, that, that's one of the things the, uh, report does shine a light
on. Uh, the, the big change coming there
is that the, the capitation model is being
reviewed, and from the 1st of July next year...
Like, we saw a 6.5% uplift this year in, uh,
capitation for, for GPs, but the model
is being, uh, reviewed. And rurality
is going to be a factor-
Mm-hmm.
... not just age or sex or whatever.
So rurality and the, the challenges that, that
our seniors in rural areas have in getting access to
healthcare will be, um, will be very much part of that.
So I think that's a big step forward.
Thank you. Right, we've now got a new question, line of questioning from Mike
Butterick.
Thank you, Chair.
Minister, um, 9th of April, yourself and, uh,
Minister Willis, uh, had a wool announcement that effective 1st of
July 2025, um, agencies or ministries should,
uh, use wool-
Yeah.
... where practical and possible. How's that gone?
Well, I guess the flagship contract is with Kaiangora, so it was good
to see them-
Mm-hmm. ... quickly come on board after a lot of public, uh, uh, pressure
as well, which was great to see, actually.
The public are right behind this, uh, the wool in government
buildings. Uh, in terms of the reporting, there's an annual
report back, so the, the, um, various departments have to
report back on, uh, what the, what their uptake
of wool has been and, and if they haven't used wool in a particular build, why they
haven't. Um, also note that since that time,
there's been a further, uh, bolstering this policy is the
fact that the, um, procurement rules have been
changed, with benefit to New Zealand, uh, has got to be built
in, uh, more rigorously, uh, and taken into
account of. So not just, uh, price, so we expect that to also,
uh, assist wool.
Yup, thank you.
Yeah.
Madam Chair, I have a question.
Uh, is this your primary question?
Yes, I, I, I've got a primary question, Madam Chair,
Yeah, well, you're, you're, you're in the chair, so
I- It's a supplementary on the wool question though, but it is to do with the wool.
Is that all right?
Yes, that's fine with
Yeah, Minister, if I can, o- on the back of Mike Butterick's question,
um, obviously that was a more domestic, uh,
conversation around wool. What about w- you working
with, uh, Minister McClay in terms of market
access, um, for offshore wool markets,
uh, for New Zealand product, um, insofar much
as that I know that the, the Chinese populace is going through all manner of
rigorous change and has got some real internal problems.
Are we looking for new markets for wool offshore, and are you advocating
for that with Minister McClay?
Absolutely, yes. Well, the, the Wool Impact, uh,
Initiative, uh, that, that's partly funded through
MPI, uh, that's their, their primary focus, is
trying to bring global brands, uh, you know,
attach global brands, uh, to local
manufacturers. And
that has... Yeah, that, that... 'Cause you're right,
the that the wool in government buildings and some of the domestic
initiatives are really good, but that's actually those export markets.
Mm-hmm.
Uh, India, uh, the free trade deal,
y- I don't know if any people are aware, but wool's actually our biggest
export, uh, commodity into India.
They've got a, a national strategy of tripling their
textile, uh, exports over the next, by 2030.
Uh, this is a- already a massive industry.
So the work that Minister McClay is doing opening up the free trade
deal will be, uh, massive
for that. Uh, and I also traveled to China as part of
a, uh, a delegation, uh, September, I think,
and-... the Nanjing wool market where 30% of New Zealand's
wool is traded. And that
was extremely positive in terms of, uh, for- from our perspective
that they were almost desperate as, "Where's the
wool?" And they were concerned about the price rising.
Uh, there has been, uh, th- it's stuff like uniforms into
the, uh, you know, the train conduc- you know, as you're aware, it's very
centralized over there.
Mm-hmm.
So- Mm-hmm.
... a lot of it goes to uniforms, uh, through, you know, these
massive government departments that they have over there.
So, there's, um, a pivot to wool there.
There's some stuff around, uh, the
EU, uh, regulations that have,
have really, uh, advantageous for natural fibers in terms
of, uh, some of the regulation they're putting on, uh,
synthetics. Uh, so there's lots of good stuff that these trade
deals are opening up. Uh, and you know, the work that our, uh, both
Wool Impact and NZTE and the like are doing, uh, to
assist some of our local manufacturers gain access to these markets.
So, y- very positive.
Excellent.
Okay. Very good. Thank you, Minister.
Tha- thank you. Um, look, I'm conscious we've got 15 minutes more of the minister's
time. I've got pri- uh, primaries from Jo, Mark, and Scott.
So, we'll fire away. Jo.
Thank you. Um, and I just do wanna acknowledge all the work that you've done in the
wool space, Minister. Um, coming back to your advocacy
though. One of the first questions or first times you were before our select
committee, I think I asked you about your advocacy, um, or no, about
the c- concerns that the disabilities community raise about
access to services in rural communities.
And at that time, that was something that hadn't been on your radar and I'm just
interested to know what engagement, if any, you've had in that
space since then and in your role as minister.
Um, Jane, have we got...
(clears throat)
I'm actually not... Yeah, I'll be totally honest with you,
I'm not aware of any specific-
Okay.
... um, representations we've had from-
... dis- disability community. One of the issues with this portfolio is it's so
wide ranging.
Like everything... And it's like, what do you focus on?
Yep.
And, and, you know, so some of these things-
Okay.
... we just literally don't have the capacity to take on.
Unless they, you know, are lobbying hard, uh, for it.
That would be, that would probably be good.
I think the community would probably really appreciate,
um- Yeah. So, I'll, I'll take that on board.
Uh, alternatively, if the, um, if the ministers are doing something or a
proposal in that space, then that's when we tend to engage.
Yeah.
Um, but I would also say that we just recently had somebody join our team from the
Ministry for Disabilities. So, um, getting a little bit of a viewpoint in
there for the team.
And I understand Minister Upston and Ducey are both working really s- uh,
proactively-
Yeah.
... in that space and that's across all communities.
And we, yeah, and we engage them, yes.
One sup and then-
And that's it. And so my supplementary is around advocacy-
Yep.
... and your role in advocacy. And with the recent changes that we've
seen, uh, to pay equity, um, and
that affects a lot of rural women who work with, you know, those in the disabled
community, the senior citizens and all those sorts of, um, teachers, et
cetera. What efficacy, uh, did you
play when that decision was being, um, discussed?
Did you, did you argue for those in the rural community, the women that are
largely impacted by that decision?
Uh, that was a cabinet decision, which we didn't have any specific input into.
You had no input?
No.
No conversations?
No, that wasn't something that we've, um-
Okay.
... specifically advocated for.
Thank
But I would say that since, uh, I'd hate to give the impression we've
done nothing, uh, 'cause we've, since June, since we last here, I think
we've, is it like 53 cabinet papers that we have
contributed to-
Yes.
... with the rural lens. So, you know, it is a very broad,
um, space with-
Mm-hmm.
... uh, you know, a small team. So, we do-
Yeah.
... have to focus our efforts.
Wait, Minister.
Yeah, and I do want to acknowledge the team in the, in the Office of Rural
Communities. They do do a great job.
Thank you. Okay, um,
Mark. Did you have a question?
Y- finally, minister. I, no, and I, it'll be my last question, I think.
Thank you.
Um, la- uh, I'm thinking of the labor forces and the rural labor force a,
a, a- and, um, uh, some of the questions that Jo and I have
had in the past about vocational training, um, i- i- to
you, uh, a- and how education has bled into the labor
force. Um, how are you working with the education
sector where you can to advocate for
young learners, um, people that have gone through,
uh, a, some sort of education system to, to go into the
labor force and what retention looks like?
Because there seems to be a breakdown often when young people are leaving
high school in rural communities and if they are staying in those
communities, often, um, they don't n- necessitate,
uh, full-time employment a lot of the time.
Um, it's been an issue before. Is it an issue now?
And are you, uh, canvassing that, uh, with Jane and your team?
Thanks for that question, Mark, and I think it's a really important one.
Uh, yes, we are. Um, as you'll be aware, there's quite
significant reforms to the, um, the
vocational education, uh, that Mini- Minister Simmons is, uh,
putting through. And whilst, uh, Minister Hoggard has the rural
skills portfolio, we do recognize this is a pretty significant issue so we
have, uh, uh, dabbled, uh, been quite
involved in this. Um, actually, one of the,
uh, things that we have advocated for, uh, successfully
within those
reforms, there was $20 million kept aside for
specific rural-
Mm-hmm.
... uh, initiatives and, uh, I was very pleased to see Telford down
in, uh, South Otago, uh, be the recipient of some of that extra
funding. Uh, very important, uh, for our rural, uh,
sector. Uh, but more broadly,
the, the, there's a group called
Agpeople and Pathways that we've been engaging with, uh, and I understand
Mike, uh, Butrick and, and Jo Luxon have also been
engaged with them, uh-To be fair though, they're a little bit
concerned about the- the- the big
swings in policy between governments, uh, and they're
wanting to have a- a broader oversight.
And we're talking about groups like, um, the
AgITO's, um, um, Growing Future
Farmers, uh, the likes, so very, very credible groups.
So Minister Hogard and I are working with them to- to
understand some of their concerns a bit more, uh, 'cause they want to
have a more holistic picture right from when...
what we're teaching in schools through,
uh, to retention, as you rightly point out is- is
really critical, uh, and what we need to do, uh,
to- to just improve- improve that.
Uh, so it's a big piece of work, but we're really engaged in it because we think
it's- it's important, and it is important.
Uh, so, um, yeah, I guess watch this space a little bit,
but I can assure you we are engaged in it.
Thank you, Minister.
Thanks very much. All right. Fire away, Scott.
Thank you. So the Jobs For Nature program helped improve our freshwater
quality, our biosecurity, our biodiversity,
and, uh, what modeling ha- has been done
to look at
the impact of cutting that program on our
environment?
Um, well, there was time-limited-
Yeah.
... funding, so, uh, you know-
(coughs)
... I guess that was a priority of the- of past
government. Um, thr- I guess we've got to
put another hat on here, but through the regional development portfolio, I
sit on the Labor Market Ministers Group, and I have actually asked that question
for some modeling to be done. So yeah.
So one of the big benefits, to Mark's point, was the
ability to employ young people and train upskilled
workers, so that- that vocational training that happened through the Jobs For
Nature. Um, if you're thinking
about so- keeping some part of it or reinstating some part of it, is
this where you're thinking of going to- to make sure
that we have that youth employment and that- that pathway into employment
in our rural communities?
Bearing in mind we don't make these decisions, but, uh, on an advocacy basis,
I'll just go back to our previous discussion.
I think, um, one of the things we've found is some of those time
limits and budgeting, and there was, um...
And forgive me, I can't remember the name of the program, but
when I was up in, uh, Opotiki last week or on
the Bay of Plenty, we went to a mussel farm-
Mm. Yeah.
... and TO ʻOhuwa and they were-
Yes.
Yes. ... referencing a program-
Mm. Great program.
... with the Te Reha name that I can't
recall.
Mm-hmm.
And they were saying, "Look, it was actually going pretty well and then the funding
got cut." And that's exactly what these AgPeople and Pathways
people, uh, are talking about, is what,
um,
yeah, so
what's working and what's not doesn't feel particularly coordinated at the moment.
And they wanna have... Uh, and they feel we have, we need greater
oversight over it. And I've asked Jane and her team to do a
piece of work on- on exactly those issues.
One final sup. Minister, I visited,
um, the Wakatipu Basin, um, twice or...
and- and looked at the wilding pine problem recently through the
Molesworth. Wilding pines are infesting our
hill and high country. They were under...
They were being managed under the Jobs For Nature program.
What investment is going into
ensuring that we keep wilding pines, we keep our hill and high
country? What investment is going into ensuring that we
manage the wilding pine crisis that we're- we're
facing?
Well, there has been extra investment, uh, above the baseline, which is
something like $2 million, but, uh, I'll be honest with you, Scott, not enough.
I- I- I genuinely believe not enough.
This is a problem that we have to get our arms around, and that's certainly, uh, my
advocacy. But it's not just funding, it's- it's also, you know, how do
we use grazing, uh, uh, potentially in-
Mm.
... fire as well.
Which, um,
some, uh, trial work's been done on at the moment.
So it's- it's kind of an all-of-the-above thing, but I- I do think that's something
that we need to, uh, more focus on. It's certainly,
uh, something that is part of my advocacy towards Budget
'26.
Wish you all the best with that. Chairman, I just...
I do want to just wanna make it clear because it came up yesterday in the committee
as well, that the Jobs For Nature funding, it was a...
it was a time-limited budget, so it was not cut by this government.
Well, it's-
Oh,
that's-
That's a debating point.
...
We're- we're scrutinizing it.
So, yeah.
They could have continued it.
I- I will actually address that.
I- I think, with all due respect, Madam Chair, that is semantics.
It's the total that's going in the corner, going in, and it's outcomes based, and
we are losing that battle at the moment, and we cannot lose that battle.
Yeah.
Excellent.
Okay.
Are you gonna add this up?
I think I'll leave them off. I think I'll leave them off.
Well, I'll keep answering your questions.
Oh, would you like to? Okay.
(laughs)
Okay. (laughs) Um, we've, um, we've seen
in the Jobs For Nature funding that- that- that
program was... the benefits were set to increase over the
years with positive results in water quality, which we know is a real problem,
but also avoiding flood damage rather than just building, um,
building stuff. Avoiding flood damage in the first place is a lot
cheaper, and in reducing unemployment.
So what's the government doing now? Is the...
is it simply building stock banks to...
rather than addressing the flood? What's... where's the government going?
Well, more good change because actually just building flood banks is really
critical, and there's, uh... the regional funds put 200
million into that, which is co-invested, uh, I think it's something like
450 million in- in total with regional
councils. Uh, the Resource Management Act will make it a
lot easier for river management to take place, which is a big issue in
terms of, uh, managing some of these weather events.
So I- I would argue we're- we're doing a hell of a lot that doesn't
necessarily... some of that's regulatory and not
just- just a big dollop of money.
Just a big dollop of money (laughs)
Um,
but more broadly, in terms of the...
uh, I do think that Jobs For Nature program did
have some be-... and I think the wilding pines, uh, is probably a good example of
that. Uh, as I say, I have asked through the Labor Market Ministers Group
that I'm on, to have a... do analysis on that program.
Uh, there is some evidence that there was quite a lot of inefficiency in it, but
that doesn't mean that the broad thrust of the program didn't have some merit.
So yeah.
Thank you, Minister. Right. I think we're do- all done.
Thank you very much for your ad- advocacy for rural communities.
It- it is very much valued and appreciated.
So thank you and thanks for your time today.
Thanks.
Thank you, Minister.
Good to see you as well, Mike.
Thanks, Mike. You take care, eh?